get it make that sure the point of our
discussion about belief and the sensible
like I guess the reason I kind of felt
let's say unconvinced it's because a
little bit too vague but the idea like
like to base our moral judgments or
moral compass on such made concepts as
the sense of the observed and the sense
of disgust or whatever other senses like
it feels more like a as if you feel
feels more of judgments not perceive
them all right reason to them I don't
know it kind of worries me on a basic
level I don't know why exactly what I
think it should be a lot more clearer if
what i think i think that i think that
morality is worrying i mean i think i
think if you're being honest with
yourself about morality and moral
judgments i think you should be worried
so we already said i was a teenager
asking myself if i should murder someone
because i knew for a fact this man was a
pedophile and a rapist and I knew he'd
gotten away with it I knew he'd continue
to get away with it because he was a
judge he was part of the system and the
whole system for decadent and I had to I
had to reason through cognitively what
is the right thing for me to do or for
me to not do and hashtag spoilers I
decided not to do anything and I really
had to think through we know what was
the right decision here anyway and I
felt more pressure on me I you know I
could say more about that that's scary
that's worrying and you get even if you
read Shakespeare you know sorry I mean
even in Romeo and Juliet Romeo Jewett's
but a lot of teenagers with knives and
swords getting into knife fights you
know tibalt die isn't everything you
know I mean for most of human history
you have teenagers making decisions
about war and death and so on and you're
right it's it's worrying I think I think
the more honest and accurate your moral
philosophy is the more worrying it's
going to be and the greater the dynamism
of
don't is gonna be that we live with
doubt and uncertainty and passion and
and feeling involved now you know are
there philosophers who claim to have
constructed a reassuring rational and
for me a reassuring rational edifice of
universal reliable answers to these
questions yes
for example utilitarianism and I think
utilitarianism is a great example of why
all of that approach is deeply flawed
misleading dangerous and wrong and
utilitarianism has I think no influence
in legislation or world politics
directed us this is this is one side of
that but you know the you know one of
the current schools of utilitarianism
they come to the conclusion that the way
you want to live your life is to become
a high-powered executive banker or a
stockbroker that you should try to earn
as much money as possible and then
donate as much money to as possible to
charity they call it earn to give this
is there a new model of the ideal this
is absurd to me in many ways but they
come to this through a cold clinical
formulaic style of reasoning they think
they're trading trading in moral moral
certainties you know but all those
systems of moral certainty are a joke to
me right I mean okay so look if you just
think about a society that's a little
bit detached from you okay so Saudi
Arabia despicable social system
despicable government despicable culture
and religion for being all the way
honest and if I'm born wealthy in Saudi
Arabia you're telling me the best thing
I can do is get a high paying job maybe
as an oil company executive maybe in
finance or banking and and give to
charity that fits perfectly into a
Muslim society this is you know as a cat
and salon culture it would be very well
regarded you can move up the social
system you can be a 100 percent
conformist and not question anything
your parents did or anything yours
decided and the Saudi government can
keep abducting people off the street and
putting them into ghost houses
and assassinating dissidents with
snipers on rooftops and and you have no
problem with it because you're a
utilitarian who believes in earned the
give you know is Saudi Arabia today I'm
ok how about the United States when
slavery still existed does he tell us no
it makes no sense we live in a world
with again sense of absurdity I mean
what did I just do the subtext of what
I'm doing is I'm appealing to your sense
of absurdity isn't it absurd to think
you're making the world a better place
by being a conformist and a banker and
an oil executive I mean sir the oral
industry again is immoral and
ecologically flawed and it's way too and
think you're making the world a better
place because you're gonna earn all this
money live in luxury and give and give
money to charity no I understand the
appeal understand what some people want
to believe that but again I'm pointing
in challenging it here I'm actually not
appealing dear faith
I'm not appealing to you know your
belief in some other ideal I'm actually
only appealing to this limited use of
reason that's gonna show a Fisher that's
gonna appeal to your your your sense of
absurdity and again it's Cory even worms
if we use Nazi Germany or something so
if you're alive in Nazi Germany or
you're just gonna earn as much money
conform with the social political system
and give money to charity what are you
gonna say when the Holocaust is over
well I gave I gave 40 percent of my
income to charity maybe I gave 60
percent of my goacci yeah so yeah and
and and you know look a my set of
ethical principles I know is not
universal but I don't feel that it's
only people born in Nazi Germany or born
and Saudi Arabia who have the weight of
history on their shoulders the weight of
even sorry for me as it can aid the
weight of genocide on their shoulders
the moral guilt of being part of an
immoral Society of if you conform being
a conformist in an evil society I feel
that way about Canada too it's true in
Canada it may be more subtle than being
in Nazi Germany or being an insider but
yeah I do I do feel that way so uh yeah
Universal
ethical principles are reassuring and
they're all the more dangerous for that
reason I would rather live with that
doubt and I even you know preach to
others sure you know get upset you know
find it yes all right you didn't say you
fended upsetting I'm sorry you found
that which word you used be worried yeah
Maria right no but be worried be more I
think that's quite appropriate yeah like
I think you have to assume that human
nature is like it's fundamentally good
or there's some goodness there that that
you are depending on yeah okay okay if
you if you ever want to adopt this see
so it's a great that's a great point I
think the exact opposite is true I think
that if you're Catholic or communists or
utilitarian if you believe in an
absolute ethical system you you you
therefore need to believe that everyone
is good or most people are good I can
flip it around for you what percentage
of people are cocaine addicts or heroin
addicts in a city like Vancouver or in
Toronto now as a percentage it's not
that many what percentage of people are
alcoholics in countries where alcohol is
available everywhere even even let's
extend video game addicts how many
people are addicted to video games video
games are available they live work some
some whether it's 1% or 5% or 10% of
people you know it's it's a percentage
of people I don't believe that human
nature is universally good I don't
believe any of these things I don't I
don't believe period my system is not
based on belief however it should be
empirically obvious to everyone that
many people many at least 10% of people
would yet and shun alcohol cocaine
heroin video games right some some
people are like that whether it's 5
percent or 10 percent or 30 percent some
and for us I count myself in this
category what are we going to
do you know no it is not given to
everyone to take up the work of
government it is not given to everyone
to take up the work of research it is
not given to everyone and take up the
work of charity I
my father had nine children nine shall I
eat brothers and sisters I don't think
even one of them could can do what I do
not even when they we have a lot of
genetic material in common right I don't
think I'm in the majority I don't think
I you're politically represent the
majority but this is like when I talk
about genocide and Cree in a jib way but
even if we talk about Chinese or
Cambodia or something
not everyone can care about political
reality there are some people in
California and all they will ever care
about is getting high and skateboarding
using drugs to get high and then
skateboarding or riding a bicycle for
fun that's their whole life I'm not
trying to recruit them into politics
research and charity you know I'm not
equal and look who turns up a meal so
right now I just happen to have met you
baby it was Ari I mean a little bit of
work but this is you know my channel is
sitting there what kind of person gets
interested in this you know failed the
former scholar of Buddhism former you
know you know kind of charity were her
you know political science major so my
channel is talking about some of these
themes some people are gonna get
interested in what I have to offer and
the challenge I'm making to the
unexamined life of getting stoned and
riding your skateboard every day you
look right up to Tamar he's only 21 he
could he could decide to spend the rest
of his life getting stoned or using
drugs and riding a skateboard I don't
think you I think if you did you would
be miserable someone else would be happy
there were tons of people who were happy
it Adolf Hitler's dystopia they didn't
mind they didn't care they did 9 a lot
of them were alcoholics probably and
they saw alcoholism was pretty high in
Germany at that time you know they're
closed they closed the window and drank
more whiskey or drank more schnapps shut
up
get on with your lives right so no this
is the thing when you're not I'm not
making claims that are universal about
human nature or even human potential
I don't think might my own brothers I
don't think they have the potential
I them you know and so we there's a
range of intelligence amongst my
brothers and sisters but one of my
brother's is so [ __ ] he's never said
a word in any language he can't even
speak English he can't speak any
language he's that severely returned so
you know I'd like to think I'm at the
opposite extreme right now maybe I'm in
the middle of the spectrum maybe we
should be optimistic
the spectrum goes a lot higher if so you
people are not on YouTube the people on
the other end of the spectrum come on
put me to shame you make better YouTube
videos about philosophy politics and
veganism yeah but you know no I so
there's there's nothing Universal about
it but for those who have that that
potential you know I've got to reach out
to them and ask you know can't we do
more and a lot of the time so especially
when I talk to older people you know
that's what so you let's say you're
talking to a professor of political
science someone who thinks they've
devoted their life to doing something
morally good you know through politics
and you say to them why do you wear
leather shoes why do you wear that
chopped up pieces of a dick hip - then
they've never thought about it you know
you know will you talk about ecology or
you talk about these nights so there are
ways the people who already are in some
sense committed to trying to make a
positive difference in the world again
whether that's through politics or
research or charity or arts I mean very
rarely in my life but maybe you talk to
someone who's committed to the arts and
making a politician I think that's you
know you know it's these are people who
can be mobilized yeah sure so summing up
your like your view as I understood it
you basically say that the people who
bring forth more change in society are
like a very small minority of elites
kind of like Hannibal and elitism okay
what you said is completely
some kind of leaders men and those are
the only people who matter and you
formulate your kind of arguments and and
philosophy based on how you can best
address them this late in this class of
people and convince them so it's a good
challenge in my view but I do I do
disagree with the characterization so
when I when I say people are a minority
that doesn't that doesn't make them
elite it just means there aren't that
many of them so you could have these
characteristics and be born poor you can
be black or white you can be of any
ethnic group and you can and again even
within your own family and believe me
there's nothing genetic about it and so
on I don't know do you have brothers you
have one brother right okay so all right
so you know you have enough diversity in
your family and I'm sure they're gonna
take very different paths in life from
you I'm sorry I don't don't want to get
into this but you know I just say within
a given family so you know so for one
thing no it's not an elite for another
thing you're talking about a minority of
people that choose themselves nobody
else chooses them or appoints them and
you're also talking about a minority
that anyone can exit at any time at any
time you can go back to you can choose
to go use drugs and ride your skateboard
you can go to the unexamined life you
can get you can get rid of all your
moral responsibilities we could go back
to eating meat tomorrow and the reasons
what we're not going to include
discussed include the sense of the
absurd include a sense of reason include
you know these kind of negative
indicators if again you notice I'm not
using the word virtue it would mean but
you know you can construe it you can
turn it inside out and express this in
terms of positive virtues which is also
a valid way to describe it sure but sure
but like the number one reason if I
tried eat meat tomorrow I'd be disgusted
as partly because of what the the meat
means I would be disgusted also to be
put in mercury into the ocean smashing
mercury containers like sorry these many
other examples you know um yeah I I in a
sense I know what it means or at least I
know what it means to me and the
is a very powerful relationship there
that has in almost instinctual forms of
disgust and proportion that comes in so
no sir but just answer question in
saying that it's a minority of people I
don't I don't mean that it's in the lead
they could be over there could be
primarily oppressed and poor people
depending on the the country in the
culture and you know the people who are
born in Saudi Arabia and look around
them and say this is observed this has
to change they can be at any social
class you know same with Iran and so on
so you know this sense of challenging
the values and assumptions you were
raised with I think it can arise
spontaneously kind of almost anywhere
with almost any kind of person and if
any I would say probably people who are
born rich or probably at a disadvantage
because they have they have so many
rewards for conforming and not
questioning you know and in the culture
and millio that Iran they have so many
earths I mean you know there are rich
people who get involved in politics but
they're involved in politics not to
change anything just to keep things the
same or just to make more money over to
IBM you know sorry
shut up the George W Bush but you know I
mean so no I would guess if anything
there's a bit of an inverse relationship
to the the privilege of former
seventeen I guess don't you think that
it's exactly because of this realization
like most people will not be part of
this minority that like universal or
absolutist values like the ones that
religions offer other ideologies are
like on a purely pragmatically yeah
useful in society and do play an
important role like can you like really
just I am the sense for the majority of
people in society to leave them like to
the right decisions in their lives like
that's right no no no I I believe right
right right no I totally good question
but you know I'm not a libertarian I
don't believe in so I mean your phrasing
was good there he asked do you believe
you can leave people to make these these
moral decisions
and my answer is no so a great example
circumcision or general mutilation
people paying for a surgeon to use a
knife and mutilate the penis of a boy or
the the vagina of a girl this is very
common in Muslim countries it's also
common in Judaism and in some forms of
Christianity this is a worldwide
faith-based phenomenon um if you have
the attitude you just leave people to
make their own decisions to this no I
don't believe that at all I think that
some minority of people just the same
with cigarette smoking if you just leave
people that smoke cigarettes that's more
than 10% of people are gonna keep smoke
easier I don't know it's gonna vary from
but maybe in some countries it's 50%
someone dissent yeah but millions of
people are gonna keep smoking so no how
do you get rid of smoking public
education but sure to some extent
government enforcement regulation and
posters and I think there are all kinds
of ways you can guide a society to quit
smoking I would prefer not to have the
army o positive that prefer to do it in
nonviolent ways but sure ultimately
there is a kind of coercion involved and
when I was a kid in Canada you know that
there were actually questions about how
how would the school treat students who
smoked cigarettes because like could
they actually be punished or was this in
effect like a civil right where the
students were were allowed to smoke
cigarettes in insert didn't so there are
there are difficult decision make but
also with with circumcision I I would
completely support you know in effect
the minority of the population who are
not an elite they're gonna be spread all
over the place wherever they are who
wake up and realize this is barbaric and
this is harmful you're harming in
offense you know you're doing damage to
people biologically to wake up and get
organized and hold preferably through a
democratic process you know pass a law
and end this you know in the country and
of course it's better to do it through
public education it's better to do it in
a participatory way but ultimately no I
do believe in coercion and you serve for
me the perfect example
some water pollution you know I don't
believe you have the right to to dump
anything in the water but not your poon
on your sewage not your paint you're
finished painting your house you pour
the paint in the what no you know I
totally believe in of course public
education would help people may not
realize throwing paint is in the water
is a really serious form of pollution
education and so on is definitely
important but ultimately yeah
enforcement sure yeah I think there's
gonna be a minority people in government
to make that decision or whenever people
care about it and lobby on it the same
way gay rights was a minority movement I
think it benefits the majority but it's
totally I might already movement yeah I
think how do you reconcile this view
with your rejection of using violence as
a means of bringing forth the socialist
or communist ideals and realize them in
a society like like how do yes a
government-sponsored violence or
coercion and to objectives and other
situations where you draw a line or is
it just that automatic like does it just
depend on the situation like you're
you're with government for sure and
coercion if it serves a perceived public
good and how do you define it like this
is yeah I know this is kind of a murky
situation you Polly something if you if
you stand if you don't have any problem
with government coercion oh I don't know
if you can call it violence but yeah it
is under the strain of violence right if
you can at least say right sure yeah
you'll go to jail if you justified it in
in this context like of your other views
on communism and socialism generating
political activism for example like why
do you say the government can do it but
like also individuals or maybe vegan
activists or yeah right no but I think
if they also believe that but they're
doing something good like for the public
good for right right right well no I
mean you know my basic in this sense I'm
a mainstream Democrat not not in the
American sense but a mainstream person
who believes in democracy I think it's
fine for a government almost any kind of
government to come together and have
public consultations and debates and a
vote and decide for example that you
have to force children to brush their
teeth with fluoride you know that this
is something we can do collectively now
I just put in a footnote how perfectly
democratic is that how collective is it
do you really just have a dictatorship
that symbolically goes around and
consults people or is it truly Democrats
a very important question but we set
that aside now but I finished example I
believe in this this Democratic conceit
and no I do not believe in grassroots
violence or any non-government any
public minority anyone special interest
refused accusing models which would be
in this case let's say a group of
dentists get together and they decide
they're gonna go around in a group and
enforce their idea of dental hygiene
that they're gonna show up and terrorize
schools or you know that they're gonna
use again it would be low-level violence
but that they're gonna go around and in
a agitprop rebellious terroristic manner
go around trying to force people this
start using a you know proper toothpaste
with fluoride in it and so on no I don't
so to me these two things are are
totally different um but I think what
you're really asking is do I believe
that the state use of force that
government use of force well you could
put it two ways one is it always
Democratic know of course sometimes
Democrat and it's not and then two is it
always right whereas the public use of
force is always wrong so no and again so
both these things I am a nihilist
I mean empirically no I don't assume
that there were going to be cases where
the government is is horribly wrong and
but why should it be Democratic if it
only a minority of people yeah usually
who have this reaction whoa wait no
that's that's that's a very good that's
a very good question but I think I think
for me that the the answer is a part of
the question the obligation on that
enlightened minority is precisely to
convince the majority in order to
convince you know the plurality of
whoever is involved in political process
so I mean in Canada I mentioned this
example recently but back in the 1980s
so I was already alive the 1980s there
really was a public discourse about
whether or not it was acceptable for a
homosexual man to be employed as a
schoolteacher because at that time there
was prejudice and apprehension and fear
basically the fear was that any gay man
who was a schoolteacher
would be trying to have sex with
students or would be engaged in
something like pet pedophilia or
pederasty you know something along those
lines and that was a very very difficult
debate to have where people had to stand
up and say no being a homosexual is
different from being a pederast or a
pedophile it is different from you know
not having the lack of professionalism
to have sex at the office or whatever
your job is you know that these issues
they really had to be had to be talked
through um so the the process of you
know if you like Socratic dialogue of
building your case of reasoning through
and debating those policies that is
massively important and you generally
will not get that in a military
dictatorship or a monarchist regime